Running a marathon is life.
James Hibberd
2024-09-17

At first it’s just an idea. Then you commit. It becomes real, it’s going to happen, so you make plans. You tell people, you buy gear, you map out a timeline. The anticipation is exciting but it makes you nervous; perhaps you’re not ready. But you have time to prepare.

And then you’re there, on the start line. A surreal feeling that what you’re been imaging for so long is happening right now. You start, feeling excited but unprepared. Everything feels new, overwhelming. As you move your body, awkward at first, you find your stride. It starts to feel natural, like your body was supposed to do this. You’re confident. Kilometres go by. 

Nerves have faded but you look ahead and feel uncertain. Although you started strong you have no idea what’s to come. There is so much outside of your control: the weather, the course, how your body will hold up. You have no choice but to stay focused and keep going. Have faith.

And then there are setbacks: the hills, the headwinds, the aches. You start to tire and suffer. Your initial enthusiasm is waning and you begin to doubt yourself. To stop would be so easy. 

But then people step forward offering water, food, and encouragement. You have a renewed determination. The concerns you started the race with seem trivial, you shed them, you have the singular focus to finish. 

And then you do. Your body is spent, your mind numb, but your soul is glowing. You’ve won no money, acquired nothing material, but that seems irrelevant. You set yourself a challenging goal that was important to you and achieved it. And that’s really the only thing that gives life meaning. You walk away aching but content. In the past few hours you’ve lived the full arc of life.
