# Improve productivity by improving humans, not tools.

About 3 million years ago humans invented the first tools. Since then our productivity as a species — the value of all the things we produce — has roughly been a function of the `number_of_humans` * `power_of_our_tools`. To produce more (to grow our economies) we either made more humans and/or invented more powerful tools. The number of humans alive today has grown to about 8 billion, and our tools have evolved from simple hammers, to ploughs, to money, to steam engines, to the iPhone.

But I think we’ve now reached a breaking point. Adding more humans and/or inventing more powerful tools feels like it will cause more harm than good; it will reduce overall productivity rather than increasing it. I think the equation needs to be revised to reflect an overlooked component: `number_of_humans` * `quality_of_those_humans` * `power_of_our_tools`. I feel that investing in the `quality_of_those_humans` component is now the most impactful way to increase productivity.

As a simple example, imagine we have a group of randomly-selected humans and the productivity of this group will be measured as the average time it takes them to run a marathon. We could try to maximise their productivity by giving them the best running shoes, shorts, t-shirts, gels available (optimising for `power_of_our_tools`). Alternatively, we could give them basic shoes, shorts, etc. and instead focus on physical and mental training: encouraging them to run everyday, building their endurance (optimising for `quality_of_those_humans`). I think the second strategy would ultimately achieve a faster average marathon time (be shown to be more productive).

Maybe that example was too simple. Maybe physical strength isn’t a good analogy when thinking about human productivity today, when most of us are “knowledge workers” who add value using our minds rather than our bodies. But the mind, just like the body, can also be developed/grown/refined in order to be more productive. We can train to strengthen virtues like discipline, creativity, courage, endurance and compassion. We can develop the courage to be vulnerable and put forward a new idea that we believe in but know others don’t. We can develop the sense of selflessness that allows us to make personal sacrifices for a greater good. We can develop the imagination to spend the weekend inventing rather than shopping.

If individuals, communities, organisations, and governments invested more in optimising for `quality_of_those_humans` instead of continuing to push on the age-old strategy of increasing the `power_of_our_tools` I think we’d unlock a huge amount of untapped potential that would have a major impact on human productivity. 